The big ClassLoader change (#6411)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/class-loading-reference.adoc

=== Current Run Modes

At the moment we have the following use cases for bootstrapping Quarkus:

- Maven creating production application
- Maven dev mode
- Gradle creating a production application
- Gradle dev mode
- QuarkusTest (Maven, Gradle and IDE)
- QuarkusUnitTest (Maven, Gradle and IDE)
- QuarkusDevModeTest (Maven, Gradle and IDE)
- Arquillian Adaptor

One of the goals of this refactor is to have all these different run modes boot Quarkus in fundamentally the same way.

== ClassLoader Implementations

Quarkus has the following ClassLoaders:

Base ClassLoader:: 

This is usually the normal JVM System ClassLoader. In some environments such as Maven it may be different. This ClassLoader
is used to load the bootstrap classes, and other ClassLoader instances will delegate the loading of JDK classes to it.

Augment ClassLoader::

This loads all the `-deployment` artifacts and their dependencies, as well as other user dependencies. It does not load the
application root or any hot deployed code. This ClassLoader is persistent, even if the application restarts it will remain

> (which is why it cannot load application classes that may be hot deployed). It's parent is the base ClassLoader, and it is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(which is why it cannot load application classes that may be hot deployed). Its parent is the base ClassLoader, and it is
```

> transformer safe.

Reviewer: I think we should have an explanation of what that means.

Reviewer 2: The explanation exists, but it's further down, so I agree it should be moved up here

Reviewer 2: Can you also please add an explanation why this classloader needs to be transformer safe? Is this need driven by the fact that we need to transform dependencies in some cases?

At present this can be configured to delegate to the Base ClassLoader, however the plan is for this option to go away and
always have this as an isolated ClassLoader. Making this an isolated ClassLoader is complicated as it means that all
the builder classes are isolated, which means that use cases that want to customise the build chains are slightly more complex.

Deployment ClassLoader::

> This can load all application classes, it's parent is the Augment ClassLoader so it can also load all deployment classes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can load all application classes, its parent is the Augment ClassLoader so it can also load all deployment classes.
```

This ClassLoader is non-persistent, it will be re-created when the application is started, and is isolated. This ClassLoader
is the context ClassLoader that is used when running the build steps. It is transformer safe so loading application classes

> will not prevent them from being transformed.

Reviewer: Oh, you explain it there.

Base Runtime ClassLoader::

> This loads all the runtime extension dependencies, as well as other user dependencies. It does not load the

Reviewer 2: `as well as other user dependencies` is mentioned here for `Base Runtime Classloader`, however `Augment ClassLoader` also mentions `as well as other user dependencies`.

This seems kind of confusing, but I assume that the former is done at build time and the latter at runtime? Maybe a note should be made about this?

application root or any hot deployed code. This ClassLoader is persistent, even if the application restarts it will remain

> (which is why it cannot load application classes that may be hot deployed). It's parent is the base ClassLoader.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(which is why it cannot load application classes that may be hot deployed). Its parent is the base ClassLoader.
```

This loads code that is not hot-reloadable, but it does support transformation (although once the class is loaded this
transformation is no longer possible). This means that only transformers registered in the first application start

> will take effect, however as these transformers are expected to be idempotent this should not cause problems.

Reviewer 2: Could we have an example of what sort of transformations are meant here?

This ClassLoader is isolated from the Augment and Deployment ClassLoaders. This means that it is not possible to set
values in a static field in the deployment side, and expect to read it at runtime. This allows dev and test applications
to behave more like a production application (production applications are isolated in that they run in a whole new JVM).

> This also means that the runtime version can be linked against a different set of dependencies, e.g. the hibernate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This also means that the runtime version can be linked against a different set of dependencies, e.g. the Hibernate ORM
```

version used at deployment time might want to include ByteBuddy, while the version used at runtime does not.

Runtime Class Loader::

> This ClassLoader is used to load the application classes and other hot deployable resources. It's parent it the base runtime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ClassLoader is used to load the application classes and other hot deployable resources. Its parent is the base runtime
```

ClassLoader, and it is recreated when the application is restarted.

== Isolated ClassLoaders

> The runtime ClassLoader is always isolated. This means that it will have it's own copies of almost every class from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The runtime ClassLoader is always isolated. This means that it will have its own copies of almost every class from the
```

resolved dependency list. The exception to this are:

- JDK classes
- Classes from artifacts that extensions have marked as parent first (more on this later).

=== Parent First Dependencies

There are some classes that should not be loaded in an isolated manner, but that should always be loaded by the system
ClassLoader (or whatever ClassLoader is responsible for bootstrapping Quarkus). Most extensions do not need to worry about
this, however there are a few cases where this is necessary:

- Some logging related classes, as logging must be loaded by the system ClassLoader
- Quarkus bootstrap itself

If this is required it can be configured in the `quarkus-bootstrap-maven-plugin`. Note that if you

> mark a dependency as parent first then all of it's dependencies must also be parent first,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mark a dependency as parent first then all of its dependencies must also be parent first,
```

Reviewer 2: I think this needs to have more attention drawn to it. Extension authors would probably need to know more about this

or a `LinkageError` can occur.

[source,xml]
----
<plugin>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-bootstrap-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <configuration>
        <parentFirstArtifacts>
            <parentFirstArtifact>io.quarkus:quarkus-bootstrap-core</parentFirstArtifact>
            <parentFirstArtifact>io.quarkus:quarkus-development-mode-spi</parentFirstArtifact>
            <parentFirstArtifact>org.jboss.logmanager:jboss-logmanager-embedded</parentFirstArtifact>
            <parentFirstArtifact>org.jboss.logging:jboss-logging</parentFirstArtifact>
            <parentFirstArtifact>org.ow2.asm:asm</parentFirstArtifact>
        </parentFirstArtifacts>
    </configuration>
</plugin>
----

=== Banned Dependencies

There are some dependencies that we can be sure we do not want. This generally happens when a dependency has had a name
change (e.g. smallrye-config changing groups from `org.smallrye` to `org.smallrye.config`, the `javax` -> `jakarta` rename).
This can cause problems, as if these artifacts end up in the dependency tree out of date classes can be loaded that are

> not compatible with Quarkus. To deal with this this extensions can specify artifacts that should never be loaded. This is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not compatible with Quarkus. To deal with this, extensions can specify artifacts that should never be loaded. This is
```

done by modifying the `quarkus-bootstrap-maven-plugin` config in the pom (which generates the `quarkus-extension.properties`
file). Simply add an `excludedArtifacts` section as shown below:

[source,xml]
----
<plugin>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-bootstrap-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <configuration>
        <excludedArtifacts>
            <excludedArtifact>io.smallrye:smallrye-config</excludedArtifact>
            <excludedArtifact>javax.enterprise:cdi-api</excludedArtifact>
        </excludedArtifacts>
    </configuration>
</plugin>
----

> This should only be done if the extension depends on a never version of these artifacts. If the extension does not bring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This should only be done if the extension depends on a newer version of these artifacts. If the extension does not bring
```

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/master/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////

> = Quarkus - Class Loading Reference

Reviewer 2: +100 for this doc!

It would be wonderful to have this document completed so people that haven't followed the ClassLoader system design discussions can have a good reference point and perhaps even be able to contribute somewhat to the review process
